README.md, before:

# ShellCheck

_GitHub action for [ShellCheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/)._

## Example

```yaml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - master

name: "Trigger: Push action"
permissions: {}

jobs:
  shellcheck:
    name: Shellcheck
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - name: Run ShellCheck
        uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
```

## ShellCheck options

You can pass any supported ShellCheck option or flag with the `SHELLCHECK_OPTS` env key in the job definition.

Some examples include:

- To disable specific checks (eg: `-e SC2059 -e SC2034 -e SC1090`)
- To test against different shells (eg: `-s dash` or `-s ksh`)

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      env:
        SHELLCHECK_OPTS: -e SC2059 -e SC2034 -e SC1090
```

## Ignore paths and names

You can use the `ignore_paths` and `ignore_names` input to disable specific directories and files.
These are passed as environment variables, and should evaluate to a single space-separated string.
It may be convenient to use [`>-`](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#65-line-folding) for readability if you have multiple selectors.

```text
sample structure:
sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/ignoremetoo/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh
```

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        ignore_paths: >-
          ignoreme
          ignoremetoo
        ignore_names: ignorable.sh
```

This will skip `sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh`, `sample/directory/with/files/ignoremetoo/test.sh` and `sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh`.

You can also ignore specific files using full paths or glob patterns with `ignore_paths`.

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        ignore_paths: ./sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh **/ignoreme/test.sh
```

This will skip `sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh` and `sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh`.

## Minimum severity of errors to consider (error, warning, info, style)

You can use the `severity` input to not fail until specified severity is met, for example fail only if there are errors in scripts but ignore styling, info and warnings.

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        severity: error
```

## Run shellcheck with all paths in a single invocation

If you run into SC1090/SC1091 errors you may need to tell shellcheck to check
all files at once:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        check_together: 'yes'
```

This can turn into a problem if you have enough script files to overwhelm the
maximum argv length on your system.

## Run shellcheck only in a single directory

If you have multiple directories with scripts, but only want to scan
one of them, you can use the following configuration:

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       scandir: './scripts'
```

## Scan for additional files

If you need to scan for unusual files, you can use the `additional_files` key.

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       additional_files: 'run finish'
```

## Change output format

Shellcheck can print output in these formats: `checkstyle`, `diff`, `gcc`, `json`, `json1`, `quiet`, `tty`. See some examples [here](https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/wiki/Integration#pick-the-output-format-that-makes-your-life-easier).

- `tty` has multi-line log messages
- `gcc` has single-line log messages

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       format: tty
```

## Run a specific version of Shellcheck

If running the latest stable version of Shellcheck is not to your liking, you can specify a concrete version of Shellcheck to be used. When specifying a custom version, please use any of the released versions listed in the [Shellcheck repository](https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/tags).

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       version: v0.9.0
```

Commit message:

Add "actions" format to create GitHub annotations
Prior to this, specific violations that shellcheck reports are logged in its
output, but are not picked up by GitHub in any special way. The new "actions"
format will output shellcheck errors, warnings, and notices using respective
GitHub "workflow commands" that become annotations in GitHub's Pull Requests
view and elsewhere. This helps navigating shellcheck results in GitHub UI.

This is an alternative approach to defining GitHub problem matchers for
shellcheck output.

README.md, after:

# ShellCheck

_GitHub action for [ShellCheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/)._

## Example

```yaml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - master

name: "Trigger: Push action"
permissions: {}

jobs:
  shellcheck:
    name: Shellcheck
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - name: Run ShellCheck
        uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
```

## ShellCheck options

You can pass any supported ShellCheck option or flag with the `SHELLCHECK_OPTS` env key in the job definition.

Some examples include:

- To disable specific checks (eg: `-e SC2059 -e SC2034 -e SC1090`)
- To test against different shells (eg: `-s dash` or `-s ksh`)

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      env:
        SHELLCHECK_OPTS: -e SC2059 -e SC2034 -e SC1090
```

## Ignore paths and names

You can use the `ignore_paths` and `ignore_names` input to disable specific directories and files.
These are passed as environment variables, and should evaluate to a single space-separated string.
It may be convenient to use [`>-`](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#65-line-folding) for readability if you have multiple selectors.

```text
sample structure:
sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/ignoremetoo/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/test.sh
sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh
```

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        ignore_paths: >-
          ignoreme
          ignoremetoo
        ignore_names: ignorable.sh
```

This will skip `sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh`, `sample/directory/with/files/ignoremetoo/test.sh` and `sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh`.

You can also ignore specific files using full paths or glob patterns with `ignore_paths`.

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        ignore_paths: ./sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh **/ignoreme/test.sh
```

This will skip `sample/directory/with/files/ignorable.sh` and `sample/directory/with/files/ignoreme/test.sh`.

## Minimum severity of errors to consider (error, warning, info, style)

You can use the `severity` input to not fail until specified severity is met, for example fail only if there are errors in scripts but ignore styling, info and warnings.

example:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        severity: error
```

## Run shellcheck with all paths in a single invocation

If you run into SC1090/SC1091 errors you may need to tell shellcheck to check
all files at once:

```yaml
    ...
    - name: Run ShellCheck
      uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
      with:
        check_together: 'yes'
```

This can turn into a problem if you have enough script files to overwhelm the
maximum argv length on your system.

## Run shellcheck only in a single directory

If you have multiple directories with scripts, but only want to scan
one of them, you can use the following configuration:

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       scandir: './scripts'
```

## Scan for additional files

If you need to scan for unusual files, you can use the `additional_files` key.

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       additional_files: 'run finish'
```

## Change output format

Shellcheck can print output [in these formats](https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/wiki/Integration): `checkstyle`, `diff`, `gcc`, `json`, `json1`, `quiet`, `tty`. The special output format `actions` will reformat Shellcheck output to appear as _annotations_ in the GitHub UI.

- `gcc` has single-line log messages (default)
- `tty` has multi-line log messages and color output
- `actions` integrates shellcheck errors into GitHub Pull Requests view

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       format: tty
```

## Run a specific version of Shellcheck

If running the latest stable version of Shellcheck is not to your liking, you can specify a concrete version of Shellcheck to be used. When specifying a custom version, please use any of the released versions listed in the [Shellcheck repository](https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/tags).

```yaml
   ...
   - name: Run ShellCheck
     uses: ludeeus/action-shellcheck@master
     with:
       version: v0.9.0
```
